Q: Is it necessary to non dimensionalize the governing equation before applying the perturbation methods?  
A: Non-dimensionalizing alone may be misleading. If one of your variables is of magnitude 1000 and another one of magnitude 0.001 (before or after non-dimensionalizing does not matter) and perturbing both by an amount of 0.0001 then the effect is essentially that of non-perturbing the first variable, the result does nothing say about this variable. (Here, I assumed that perturbations are by an absolute amount, not a relative one.) So the point is to rescale the variables such a way that all variables have the same magnitude (and the size of perturbation is to be chosen according to the common magnitude). The process of rescaling may also non-dimensionalize the variables.  
  Jansen, Wolfgang. (2016). Re: Is it necessary to  non dimensionalize the governing equation before applying the perturbation methods?. Retrieved from: https://www.researchgate.net/post/Is_it_necessary_to_non_dimensionalize_the_governing_equation_before_applying_the_perturbation_methods/5763f8d348954c125a5b1ec5/citation/download. 

Q: Why does non-dimensionalization work?  
A: Basically the idea is that numbers with units must necessarily respond in a simple way when we change our system of units. If, say, I change the basic unit of length to be twice as big, then all numbers with lengthk in their units will get divided by 2k accordingly.  
  https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/1920591/why-does-non-dimensionalization-work  

Q: How a system of ODE's that is very complex can be remodeled to be kept similar in behavior with less complexity?  
A: Aggregation and emergence in systems of ordinary differential equations  
  Abstract
  The aim of this article is to present aggregation methods for a system of ordinary differential equations (ODE's) involving two time scales. The system of ODE's is composed of the sum of fast parts and a perturbation. The fast dynamics are assumed to be conservative. The corresponding first integrals define a few global variables. Aggregation corresponds to the reduction of the dimension of the dynamical system which is replaced by an aggregated system governing the global variables at the slow time scale. The centre manifold theorem is used in order to get the slow reduced model as a Taylor expansion of a small parameter. We particularly look for the conditions necessary to get emerging properties in the aggregated model with respect to the nonaggregated one. We define two different types of emergences, functional and dynamical. Functional emergence corresponds to different functions for the two dynamics, aggregated and nonaggregated. Dynamical emergence means that both dynamics are qualitatively different. We also present averaging methods for aggregation when the fast system converges towards a stable limit cycle.
  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0895717798000028?ref=pdf_download&fr=RR-2&rr=84a015e49aba5fcb
